
GREGOR KICZALES: Hi, everybody.
I just want to check in and give you some thoughts about what's
going on in the course this week.
This is always a really fun time in a MOOC
when everybody gets on for the first time,
and there's all the introductions, and you see where everybody's from,
and what kinds of things they're hoping to get out of the course.
And I've really been enjoying reading those introductions and all
the other forums.
Let me just talk about a couple of things on the forums.
So one of the threads had to do with which of the three ways
of computing average was in some sense the most clear.
And most people thought it was number one.
Some people pointed out that in some sense it didn't matter.
The people who pointed out that in some sense it doesn't matter
are technically right.
Either way, or any of the ways, you get the same number when it's evaluated.
But we like the first one best.
And in fact, one of the notes that was posted from Craig McDonald--
and in fact, Craig points out that the first choice
is the one that most closely matches one of the themes for the course, which
is learning how to write code that looks like the design.
If you didn't pick that one, if you picked the third one,
that's fine too, or even the second one.
Stick with this a bit, and we hope to convince you by the end of the class
that really you'd prefer to write the first one too.
And you could come back and debate that with us later on the course.
So another thread that was fun was the thread
having to do with all the images.
And here I'm showing you some of the images that people uploaded.
We weren't able to put all of them in here, but there's a lot of great ones,
faces seemed to be particularly popular every time.
And if you haven't had a chance to create your own image yet,
maybe you can use this set of examples as inspiration over the weekend for you
to do one of your own.
Finally just to note about the wrap up.
We enjoy reading the comments in the wrap
up and especially the suggestions for how we can improve things.
A couple of people asked for more problems to do.
And I just want to point out that if you go to the top of the screen,
there's a tab that says problem bank that has a lot more problems in it.
All the ones labeled BSL at the beginning
are good candidates for this week.
And a couple people commented on maybe the course was going a bit too slowly
because they already had programming experience.
And we're aware of this.
I know that if you have programming experience,
the first week is a bit too slow.
Let me just say two things.
One is please take the time many anyways to learn the BSL language.
You'll need it going forward.
And the other is the course really is designed
to be accessible to beginners as well as more experienced programmers.
For the beginners, we need to take some time for them
to learn BSL and get that under their feet.
Starting in week two, we'll get to the design method,
and that'll be new material for everybody.
And the course should pick up some speed for everybody
without going too fast for anyone.
One last thought I want to share about demographics.
If you read the forums, it looks like there's
a lot of people in this course who have a lot of programming experience.
It might even look like most of the people in the course
have a lot of programming experience.
And of course, it's great for those people to be here,
because the course is for beginners and people with experience.
What you're looking at here is the data we've
got so far from the poll in the wrap up module
about the amount of programming experience people
have coming into the course.
And what you could see is the two categories on the left--
the "this will be my first time" and "less than one year"--
those add up to a significant fraction of the course.
So there really is a mix of people in the course.
And that's great.
That's when it works the best.
So again, thanks for joining the MOOC.
Really glad you're here, and look forward
to hearing more from you on the forums.
Post questions there that I can answer either in the forum
or in our regular weekly video like this one.